How will Edge Intelligence Benefit IoT? (#4036)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/how-will-edge-intelligence-benefit-iot/index.md

---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true 
url: /how-will-edge-intelligence-benefit-iot/
title: How will Edge Intelligence Benefit IoT?
description: In this article, we will look at the benefits that edge intelligence has brought to IoT devices. We will learn more about edge AI chips and edge AI cameras that are part of the driving force in the IoT market.
author: grace-mumbi
date: 2021-10-07T00:00:00-15:03
topics: []
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/how-will-edge-intelligence-benefit-iot/hero.jpg
    alt: How will Edge Intelligence Benefit IoT? Hero Image 
---
With [edge artificial intelligence (AI)](/engineering-education/edge-artificial-intelligence-and-mobile-development/) internet of things (IoT) devices are becoming smarter. Edge devices now have machine learning capabilities that empower them to process complex data locally, administer solutions and make predictions. 
<!--more-->

> For instance, if you install edge IoT devices in your production plant, you can monitor the operating conditions of the machinery. With this, you'll perform predictive maintenance and avoid complete system failure, associated damages, and costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, if you install edge IoT devices in your production plant, you can track the operating conditions of the machinery. With this, you will perform predictive maintenance, avoid complete system failure, associated damages, and costs.
```

> Smart cameras equipped with edge AI chips have uncovered new use cases beyond capturing video. Such cameras can identify human traffic, monitor divers' behavior, count foot traffic, classify and segment objects, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart cameras equipped with edge AI chips have uncovered new use cases beyond capturing video. Such cameras can identify human traffic, track divers' behavior and count foot traffic. They can also classify and segment objects.
```

Customers are preferring IoT devices. And, this is pushing big players in the tech industry to invest more in the development of high-speed processors.

Both the long-established chips makers and startups are focusing on adding artificial intelligence capabilities to the edge. The startups include [Mythic](https://www.mythic-ai.com/), [Hailo](https://hailo.ai/), [Graphcore](https://www.graphcore.ai/), [EdgeQ](https://edgeq.io/), [Flex Logic](https://flex-logix.com/), [Deep Vision](https://deepvision.io/), [BrainChip](https://brainchipinc.com/), and [Blaize](https://www.blaize.com/). [STMelectronics](https://www.st.com/content/st_com/en.html), [NXP](https://www.nxp.com/), [NVIDIA](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/), [Maxim](https://www.maxim.com/), [Intel](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/homepage.html), [ARM](https://www.arm.com/), [AMD](https://www.amd.com/en), and [Qualcomm](https://www.qualcomm.com/) have been making microcontrollers and microprocessors in the edge AI for quite some time now.

#### Benefits of chip-enabled intelligent edge
Chip-enabled edge intelligence improves the value of IoT devices in many ways. Below are some of the benefits:

> - Edge AI chips generate less heat and use less power. They are integrable with handheld devices like smartphones and other non-consumer devices like robots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge AI chips generate less heat and use less power. They can be integrated with handheld devices. Like, smartphones and other non-consumer devices like robots.
```

> - Edge-based AI chips reduce or eliminate the need to transmit bulk data to a cloud solution or data center. This means processor-intensive machine learning computations happen locally, ensuring data security, privacy, and high processing speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge-based AI chips reduce or end the need to send bulk data to a cloud solution or data center. This means processor-intensive machine learning computations happen locally. This promotes data security, privacy, and high processing speed.
```

- Edge intelligence in 5G networks allows safe transportation or storage of critical data in a central location.

> - Edge AI chips help companies to collect data from connected devices and analyze the data at the device. Thus, avoiding the complexity, security challenges, and costs associated with sending and analyzing data on the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge AI chips help companies to collect data from connected devices and analyze the data at the device. Thus, avoiding the complexity and security challenges. And, costs associated with sending and analyzing data on the cloud.
```

### Edge intelligence and smart cameras on the IoT

> Smart cameras with artificial intelligence, IP connectivity, and advanced data analytics drive IoT innovations and new use cases. Chips on AI-enabled smart cameras empower IoT devices designers to create new solutions and products based on the power of edge artificial intelligence. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart cameras with AI, IP connectivity, advanced, and data analytics drive IoT innovations and new use cases. Chips on AI-enabled smart cameras empower IoT devices designers to create new solutions. And, products based on the power of edge artificial intelligence.
```

> Video conferencing devices, dashboard cameras, and surveillance cameras now have new use cases. Such as face recognition, people counting, body detection, license plate recognition, and object segmentation and classification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Video conferencing devices, dashboard cameras, and surveillance cameras now have new use cases. Such as facial recognition, people counting, body detection, license plate recognition. Also, object segmentation and classification.
```

> Chips on these cameras ensure that workloads like image processing, security, machine learning, and computer vision are kept at the edge device. Manufacturers of IoT devices have found a solution to network latency and user privacy and are now focusing resources on innovation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chips on these cameras ensure that workloads like image processing, security, machine learning, and computer vision are kept at the edge device. Manufacturers of IoT devices have found a solution to network latency and user privacy.  And, are now focusing resources on innovation.
```

#### Edge AI cameras

> AI dashboard-mounted cameras use edge processing for the detection of objects and events in real-time. This has helped improve the security, visibility, and safety of drivers, passengers, and pedestrians and reduce vehicle accidents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI dashboard-mounted cameras use edge processing for the detection of objects and events in real-time. These have helped improve the security, visibility, and safety of drivers, passengers, and pedestrians. Hence, reducing vehicle accidents.
```

> Edge AI cameras are built to run image-based deep learning and machine learning models at the local device. The dual-facing edge AI dash camera is common in parking lot management and traffic monitoring. Other edge AI cameras are used in sports broadcasting, smart farming, garbage management, and crowd analysis and monitoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge AI cameras are built to run image-based deep learning and machine learning models at the local device. The dual-facing edge AI dash camera is common in parking lot management and traffic monitoring. Other edge AI cameras are used in sports broadcasting, smart farming and garbage management. They are also used in crowd analysis and monitoring.
```

> Dual-facing edge AI dash cameras help in driver behavior analysis, fleet management, and street condition analysis. They record drivers' anomalous behaviors such as texting or talking on the phone, dozing off, drinking, and eating and send notifications and alerts of such recurring instances. All these are key to generating drivers' scorecards and lowering the risks of accidents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dual-facing edge AI dash cameras help in driver behavior analysis, fleet management, and street condition analysis. They record drivers' anomalous behaviors. Such as texting or talking on the phone, dozing off, drinking, and eating and send notifications and alerts of such recurring instances. All these are key to generating drivers' scorecards and lowering the risks of accidents.
```

In fleet management, these cameras record footage of unexpected braking, collisions, sudden accelerations, and so on. Such footage is uploaded to cloud storage automatically for later viewing.

> Waste management companies have traditionally maintained mounted cameras on garbage trucks. But they are now replacing these cameras with edge AI cameras that can identify items such as metal scrap, plastic, Styrofoam, cardboard, and paper. These cameras can also identify inappropriate and hazardous waste. This has helped improve waste disposal productivity and classification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Waste management companies have traditionally maintained mounted cameras on garbage trucks. But they are now replacing these cameras with edge AI cameras. They can identify items such as metal scrap, plastic, Styrofoam, cardboard, and paper. These cameras can also identify inappropriate and hazardous waste. This has helped improve waste disposal productivity and classification.
```

### Conclusion

> Edge intelligence is transforming the internet of things industry in a big way. It has made real-time data analysis easier, helped increase operational efficiency, and reduced data handling and storage-related costs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge intelligence is transforming the internet of things industry in a big way. It has made real-time data analysis easier. Also, it helped increase operational efficiency, and reduced data handling and storage-related costs.
```
